OSFT example (#8)
red-hat-data-services/red-hat-ai-examples: examples/fine-tuning/osft/README.md

# OSFT Continual Learning on Red Hat OpenShift AI (RHOAI)

> This example provides and overview on OSFT algorithm and an example on how to use it context of Red Hat OpenShift AI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example provides an overview of the OSFT algorithm and an example on how to use it with Red Hat OpenShift AI.
```

Author: Thanks Fiona

Our example will go through distributed training on two nodes with two GPUs each (2x48GB) however it can be tweaked to run on smaller configurations.

## Overview

Fine-tuning language models is hard—you need good data, lots of resources, and even small changes can cause problems. This makes it tough to add new abilities to a model. This problem is called continual learning and is what our new training technique, orthogonal subspace fine-tuning (OSFT), solves.

The OSFT algorithm implements Orthogonal Subspace Fine-Tuning based on Nayak et al. (2025), arXiv:2504.07097. This algorithm allows for continual training of pre-trained or instruction-tuned models without the need of a supplementary dataset to maintain the distribution of the original model/dataset that was trained.

**Key Benefits:**
- Enables continual learning without catastrophic forgetting
- No need for supplementary datasets to maintain original model distribution
- Significantly reduces data requirements for customizing instruction-tuned models
- Memory requirements similar to standard SFT

### Data Format Requirements

> Training Hub's OSFT algorithm supports both **processed** and **unprocessed** data formats via the mini-trainer backend.

Reviewer: Maybe add a link to mini-trainer here?

Author: Good idea, thanks!

    ![](./docs/04b.png)
        > [!NOTE]
        > Adding an accelerator is only needed to test the fine-tuned model from within the workbench so you can spare an accelerator if needed.
    * Create a storage that'll be shared between the workbench and the training pods.
    Make sure it uses a storage class with RWX capability and set it to 15GiB in size:
        ![](./docs/04c.png)
        > [!NOTE]
        > You can attach an existing shared storage if you already have one instead.
    * Review the storage configuration and click "Create workbench":
    ![](./docs/04d.png)
* From "Workbenches" page, click on _Open_ when the workbench you've just created becomes ready:
![](./docs/05.png)
* From the workbench, clone this repository, i.e., `https://red-hat-data-services/red-hat-ai-examples.git`
![](./docs/06.png)
* Navigate to the `examples/fine-tuning/osft` directory and open the `osft-example.ipynb` notebook
* The remaining part of this example is within the notebook itself

> [!IMPORTANT]
> * By default, the notebook requires 2xL40/L40S (2x48GB) but:
>   * The example goes through distributed training on two nodes with two GPUs but it can be changed

> >   * If you want to do model evaluation part of the example, ideally an accelerator is attached to workbench

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>   * If you want to do model evaluation part of the example, ideally an accelerator is attached to the workbench
```

# OSFT Continual Learning on Red Hat OpenShift AI (RHOAI)

This example provides an overview of the OSFT algorithm and an example on how to use it with Red Hat OpenShift AI.

Our example will go through distributed training on two nodes with two GPUs each (2x48GB) however it can be tweaked to run on smaller configurations.

## Overview

Fine-tuning language models is hard—you need good data, lots of resources, and even small changes can cause problems. This makes it tough to add new abilities to a model. This problem is called continual learning and is what our new training technique, orthogonal subspace fine-tuning (OSFT), solves.

> The OSFT algorithm implements Orthogonal Subspace Fine-Tuning based on Nayak et al. (2025), arXiv:2504.07097. This algorithm allows for continual training of pre-trained or instruction-tuned models without the need of a supplementary dataset to maintain the distribution of the original model/dataset that was trained.

Reviewer: Could we add a link to a paper/info about this?

|-----------|--------------|---|---|------------|-----|--------|-----------------|
| Training Pods (Example Default) | 2 nodes × 2 GPUs | 2 | 4 | NVIDIA L40/L40S or equivalent | 4 cores/pod | 24Gi/pod | Required |
| Training Pods (Minimum) | 1 node × 2 GPUs | 2 | 2 | NVIDIA L40/L40S or equivalent | 4 cores/pod | 24Gi/pod | Required |

> [!NOTE]
> - This example was tested on 2 nodes x 2 GPUs provided by L40S however, it will work on smaller/larger configurations.
> - Flash Attention is required for efficient training.
> - CPU and Memory requirements scale with batch size and model size. Above suit the example as it is.
> - Worker pods are configurable from the `client.create_job` call within the notebook.

### Workbench Requirements

| Image Type | Use Case | GPU | CPU | Memory | Notes |
|------------|----------|-----|-----|--------|-------|
| Minimal CPU Python 3.12 | CPU-based evaluation | None | 6 cores | 24Gi | Slower evaluation |
| Minimal CUDA Python 3.12 (Example Default) | NVIDIA GPU evaluation (Example Default) | 1× GPU | 2 cores | 8Gi | Recommended for faster testing |

> | Minimal ROCm Python 3.12 | AMD GPU evaluation | 1× GPU | 2 cores | 8Gi | AMD accelerator support |

Reviewer 2: Just to be sure, have we tested that it works with AMD accelerators?

Author: Good point, thanks. 
We will discuss testing on AMD but for now removing it. (will push with next update after some other conversations are resolved)

Reviewer 2: Yes, AMD support is not a must-have for 3.0 so it can be removed to be on the safe-side.
